---
author: admin
comments: false
layout: post
slug: they-might-come
title: "They Might Come"
categories:
- think.stack
---

The students in my [xpCrit
course](http://metalab.harvard.edu/teaching/#xpCrit) have asked me to start a
[wiki](http://dhtoolkit.wikispaces.com) to share expertise related to tools
and methodologies in digital humanities. I have a local install of MediaWiki,
but I wanted something more light-weight, and after reviewing several "wiki
farm" alternatives--[Wikia](http://www.wikia.com/Wikia),
[Wikispaces](http://www.wikispaces.com), and
[Hackpad](https://hackpad.com/)--decided to go with Wikispaces.

Using wikis in the classroom is a tricky thing because one must walk the fine
line between full-blown public access and protected "sandbox" space of the
classroom. For this reason, I wanted to start with a hosted wiki platform that
offers a flexible permission schema: write access by invitation only, and read
access open to the public. Disappointingly, Wikia has no permission settings
to speak of. Every wiki is fully public by default. (It also lacks the option
to delete the wikis, which I find kind of strange.) Hackpad was my favorite in
terms of the UI, but does not differentiate between read and write access. You
can either make the whole thing public or private. Wikispaces is perfect in
this regard. It seems like they've had the classroom use case in mind all
along and the normally premium Plus plan (5$/month) is free for educational
uses. My only gripe is with the lazy WISIWYG text editor, that does not use
the now-standard Wikipedia-like markup syntax. Ideally, one would want to
students to gain some exposure to the conventions of MediaWiki (which is by
far the most dominant wiki platform).

Setting this whole thing up, as well as reviewing my students' projects (many
of which involve a publicly-shared component), has reminded me of the biggest
challenge facing any online forum, be it a blog or a wiki--participation! It
is easy to get excited about technology and to think that building a cool
site, based on a good idea, is enough to attract readers, writers, and
contributors. But it isn't enough. For every successful Wikia page there are
hundreds languishing in obscurity. Building technology is the easy part.
Building communities is much harder. Of the 67 recorded edits on DH Toolkit
today, 66 were made by me.
