---
layout: post
title: On the Reddit Community
categories:
- think.stack

---

The search for "Reddit community" on Google News returns no fewer than [12,900
results](https://www.google.com/search?hl=en&gl=us&tbm=nws&authuser=0&q=%22reddit+community%22&oq=%22reddit+community%22&gs_l=news-cc.3..43j43i53.388.3600.0.3768.25.22.0.0.0.3.164.2380.11j11.22.0...0.0...1ac.1.EdZ5LTrh6t4).
Media [coverage](http://techcrunch.com/2015/07/06/hows-that-popcorn-reddit/) of
the
[recent](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/technology/reddit-steve-huffman.html)
[turmoil](https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2015/07/09/reddits-former-director-of-talent-breaks-her-silence/)
on the site often takes the "community" part of the equation as a given. The
"Reddit community" acts both as subject and an object of action. It is
apologized to, it wants to make its voice heard, and it demands. But to what
extent is Reddit a community? What makes for a community, in any case?

I submit that at the very least, a community identifies an assemblage of
people, places, and practices. First, a community must involve the social
element. It is hard to imagine a community of one. Second, a community usually
occupies some contiguous stretch of space or time: a site or a platform. Even
when dispersed and in exile, a community will find a way to come together, if
only virtually, online or on paper. Finally, a community will usually share a
system of values, which in turn manifest themselves as specific norms, customs,
or modes of governance. A community of faith, for example, may consist of a
group of parishioners (people) who attend church (a place) to pray (practice).
Similarly, the digital humanities community involves scholars who
[publish](http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/) in
[particular](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/)
[journals](http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/), come to the
[same](http://www.dhsi.org/) [conferences](http://dh2015.org/), and join the
same [professional](http://csdh-schn.org/) [organizations](http://ach.org).

To what extent does the idea of the "Reddit community" answer these minimal
definitions? Let's start with the easy parts first. We know that some people
identify themselves as "[redditors](http://www.meetup.com/NYC-Redditors/)." The
site and platform of their activity is reddit.com itself, an incorporated
subsidiary of Condé Nast. Good so far. But what about a common set of
practices, values, customs, and institutions? Things look much messier in this
regard. Rather than adhering to one uniform set of rules, Reddit is divided
into "areas of interest," or colloquially, "subreddits." These spheres of
activity are often quite distinct from one another: some post strict guidelines
for content submission, others censor discussion, and yet others take more of a
laissez-faire approach to community moderation.

Some of these "areas" are nothing more than massive content aggregators like
[/r/Funny](https://www.reddit.com/r/funny/), which boasts 9 million
subscribers. These are no more communities than Google News or *Huffington
Post*. Others cultivate a supportive environment where everybody knows your
name, like [/r/AskHistorians](https://www.reddit.com/r/askhistorians/),
[/r/cancer](https://www.reddit.com/r/cancer/), or
[/r/MakeupAddiction](https://www.reddit.com/r/makeupaddiction/). Attracting
from several hundred to several hundred thousand subscribers, subreddits like
these encourage an engaged public.  They enforce rules, moderate discussion,
and hold elections. They are true communities in that sense, because they hold
values in common, as reflected in their FAQs and guidelines.

In this light, Reddit, the umbrella entity, is at best a community of
communities or perhaps a platform that facilitates a range of activities: some
communal in nature, some commercial, and others simply private. In fact, there
are thousands of subreddits not accessible to the public at all that act as
nothing more than personal news aggregators. For example, a redditor on
/r/AskReddit [writes](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/1qr54b/why_do_private_subreddits_exist/) "I have a private sub[reddit] for me and my SO [significant other], it's like a
private conversation when you get 2 karma per link."

These distinctions---between private and public, community and
platform---matter, because if Reddit is not a community, then there is no
reason for us to expect a uniform set of responses or behaviors from it as a
whole.  Participants in /r/AskScience, for example, would likely want nothing
to do with the now banned subreddit
[/r/fatpeoplehate](https://web.archive.org/web/20150729153807/https://www.reddit.com/r/fatpeoplehate)
or [/r/Gunsforsale](https://www.reddit.com/r/gunsforsale/) (still around).
These communities do not share the same values. And they subsequently create
very different environments for conversation. Reddit administrators (who work
for the company) understand this difference very well. Pay attention to the
[language of this official
post](https://www.reddit.com/r/announcements/comments/39bpam/removing_harassing_subreddits/),
announcing the site-wide ban of several controversial subreddits (emphasis
mine): "We will ban subreddits that allow their *communities* to use the
subreddit as a *platform* to harass individuals when moderators don't take
action. We’re banning *behavior*, not ideas." Some finer points aside, note the
distinction between people, platforms, and practices. At least in this
instance, Reddit Inc. does not refer to itself as a community.

The [recent events at
Reddit](https://hbr.org/2015/07/how-reddit-the-business-lost-touch-with-reddit-the-culture)
expose the tension between community standards and the pragmatic needs of a
business. Members of the popular press would do well to examine their usage of
the word "community" in that context. Reddit users, like the users of other
computing platforms, or consumers of soda and burgers are just that: users and
consumers. Corporations would like to speak of their customers and products as
communities because it sounds friendly and empowering. But consumption alone
cannot rise to the standards of a community. Such standards must emanate from
the people themselves. What we are witnessing then is a Wizard of Oz-like break
down of an illusion. All this talk of "the Reddit community" implies a
commonality of purpose where there is none.

Comments welcome [@dennistenen](https://twitter.com/dennistenen)
[#onredcom](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23onredcom&src=typd&f=tweets). Change
log [here](https://github.com/denten/denten.github.io/blame/master/_posts/2015-07-29-reddit-community.md).
Read a thoughtful response from [David
Weinberger](https://twitter.com/dweinberger)
[here](http://www.hyperorg.com/blogger/2015/07/29/reddit-is-not-a-community-but-theres-a-little-more-to-say/).
