---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
title: Programming as a Foreign Language
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
---

Should programming languages count for the graduate-level foreign language
requirement in a Humanities department? Yes and no. My initial thoughts
towards a department policy are as follows:

Knowledge of computer languages can both reveal new literary-cultural
formations and serve as a powerful tool for the study of such formations.
However, it should not be viewed as a substitute for foreign language
proficiency, except for cases where such substitution is convincingly
justified and where it is warranted by sustained, deep engagement with the
material.<sup>†</sup>

The following guidelines can be used when evaluating graduate student requests
to fulfill their foreign language as a programming (computer) language.

- Proficiency in computer/artificial languages should not be generally viewed
  as a supplement to foreign languages.
- The substitution can be allowed in cases where a student's work benefits
  from computational literacy either as a *subject or a method of study*.
- Students are encouraged to articulate the exception in writing, in the form
  of a concise (one page) proposal, which describes the scope of the project,
relevant technologies involved, and a brief synopsis of secondary literature
using similar approaches.

There are two specific cases where a computer language as a foreign language
request is particularly appropriate:

1. Where a student's projected research program involves aspects of
   computational culture as a **subject of study**. These include (but not
limited to) topics in electronic literature, software studies, game studies,
online deliberation, combinatorial poetics, virtual communities, fan culture,
media studies, platform studies, sociology of knowledge, book piracy, politics
of the archive, human-computer interaction, and history and future of the
book, among other potentially relevant applications. Specific languages in
this category often include (but are not limited to) historical or otherwise
obscure dialects. Examples from proposed studies include FORTRAN, 6502
Assembler (Nintendo), and *troff*.
2. Where computer languages are used instrumentally, as a **method of study**.
   For example, medievalists may wish to acquire reading knowledge of German
to understand the secondary literature in that language. Similarly, a scholar
of Victorian British literature learns Python to facilitate analysis of
numerous texts across long periods of time. The proposed language in this
category should reasonably belong to the family of "major research languages,"
used in advanced courses of instruction. This list typically includes
languages such as Python, R, C, Java, and Julia. It does not include markup
languages (or typesetting systems) such as HTML, CSS, or LaTeX, since these do
not typically sustain advanced graduate research methodology.<sup>‡</sup>

### Format of the Exam

When possible the exam will be administered via a Jupyter Notebook following
the format of similar exams in foreign languages: one “annotation” exercise
that tests code comprehension and one “translation” exercise that tests for
reasoning and basic literacy. Two hours are generally sufficient. Students can
expect to exhibit “intermediate” level of proficiency, equivalent to
one-year’s worth of coursework in the field (or similar experience).

A sample test can be found
[here](https://github.com/denten/python-language-exam/blob/master/english-python-exam-sample.ipynb).

<small><sup>†</sup> Written in consideration of: Geisler, Michael, Claire
Kramsch, Scott McGinnis, Peter Patrikis, Mary Louise Pratt, Karin Ryding, and
Haun Saussy.  “Foreign Languages and Higher Education: New Structures for a
Changed World: MLA Ad Hoc Committee on Foreign Languages.” *Profession*, 2007,
234–45.</small>

<small><sup>‡</sup> The presence of advanced graduate-level classes in the proposed
language are a good indicator of a major research language.</small>
