---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
title: Falling Out and In Love with an Instution
subtitle: Op-ed for the <em>Columbia Spectator</em>
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
---

Read the full op-ed in the [Columbia Spectator][1].

> Rather than signifying a singular entity, whatever is meant by “the University” entails the
medical center and undergraduate schools; its grounds and labs; libraries, dormitories,
offices, and cafés. The English department joins that same body, along with the rowing team,
the custodial staff, the school and kindergarten, Columbia University Information Technology,
parents and alumni, and students and visiting scholars. My office faces the Law School in
Jerome Greene Hall. Splattered across its façade is a statue of a bewildered horse by Jacques
Lipchitz. These groupings converge and diverge in myriad ways. They speak different jargons.
We mourn and celebrate different things on different days, in memory of distinct and sometimes
contradictory occasions.

> How all that complexity could ever take a unified view on any political question is beyond
me. To love or hate this messy congregation as a whole feels like an impossible task. I don’t
envy the position of our recent presidents—Lee Bollinger, Minouche Shafik, Katrina Armstrong,
and Claire Shipman. They are singular figureheads, each tasked with personifying the metaphor
of the sprawling leviathan. To demand unity from them is to assume it among us—a unity that
doesn’t obtain.

> At best, cohesion requires slow, deliberate work. At worst, the call for unilateral action
risks creating the illusion of consensus where none exists. An ethical conflict that can be
resolved by a person internally cannot be similarly reconciled institutionally. In bringing my
inner life to order, I am free to exercise total control; unwelcome thoughts can be excised or
edited with absolute authority. But when it comes to our community, differences persist and
must be preserved. Love is something we can only ask of other people, on an individual basis,
not in aggregate.

[1]: https://web.archive.org/web/20251022174656/https://www.columbiaspectator.com/opinion/2025/10/22/falling-in-and-out-of-love-with-an-institution/
