---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
title: A compilation of Professor Tenen’s wisest sayings
subtitle: Yes, you said these things
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
---

*A list of things I might have said in my 2024 Contemporary Civilization Class. Compiled by
Olivia L.*

1. Do doggies hang out like, hey buddy! You’re my friend; I’ll protect you.
2. But when you go to sleep, I will murder you with a stick!
3. You have a nice yard. Don’t go to sleep!
4. I took your cow? What are you gonna do, go complain to the king? You’re not gonna do anything about it.
5. This cow is mine because I have this nice piece of paper.
6. Your teeth to you: “No, I’m free, don’t brush me!”
7. Bad stuff happens in the woods, for real!
8. To be clothed and robed by the luxurious Lululemon fabrics we have, that is the dominion.
9. It’s not like I touched this acorn and now I love this acorn.
10. You can’t go to war without warm underwear.
11. Ah, but my great-grandfather picked those acorns really really well.
12. Look at all of these foppish people with fancy clothes... return to nature, return to nature, return to the simple.
13. "God gave me the 10 commandments.” Another guy: “God told me to worship the golden cow.”
14. If the power goes out, my neighbors are going to come take my water.
15. Amish, meat bros, hippies, very Rousseauian.
16. Oh, we finished that last class? I mean, I’m not disappointed, but... what are the origins of inequality? I forgot.
17. "Hey guys, what’s going on? What happened to freedom of the will, are you guys going to eat me?” – From the perspective of the fat ant who will be feasted on.
18. What is the history of the species of beavers? I do not know.
19. I belong to the society of New York nerds.
20. We are combative sheep that eat each other. The special kind of angry sheep.
21. I've evolved to eat this poisonous bark that nobody eats. I have no predators. I’m just going to chill here for a million years.
22. During a discussion of Kant: “By the way, I think that’s someone’s wallet.” – Thank you. “That was my duty!”
23. Do doggies dream about flying? I think so.
24. Let’s have freedom, French revolution! Kkkkggght. Ok, never mind.
25. I have no idea where I’m going; I may be stuck in a log or seeping into the ground.
26. I am a historical person. I have glimpsed the course of history. AND IT IS THE LAW!
27. Ah, I gotta spend another day on Brandon’s laptop to make sure he can do his homework!
28. ...putting it into a funky hat and going, ‘yeahh I’m a farmer!’
29. Ten years ago: I live in a studio and I have nothing. Ten, twenty years later, I live in a three-bedroom apartment, and oh my god why do I have three dressers.
30. Ok, let’s go old school. D&D. We’re moving things around. But then you have to be like, horse, horse, horse, pile of cash.
31. Maybe you’re a computer scientist-economist-political-theorist.
32. The table is friendly.
33. "But uh, what is on for next week?” – Next week we have spring break. “Sweet.”
34. Your refrigerator wants to call up your toaster and have a little chat.
35. "So I’ve been working in aviation accident archives” – bridges hands together – “Mmmm.”
36. We need you here, bro! You can’t go.
37. The lazy river of Nietzsche.
38. Oh, you want to go on spring break, but... grandma is old and... just for the family!
39. "One of my favorite novels is called Cement, and it’s about cement factories.” – What happens in Cement? “They make cement, what do you think?”
40. "What is a custom you feel you need to adhere to?” – Working in finance.
41. Nobody told me to be honest when I was a child. Well, maybe only my parents.
42. You assume that you have to come to class wearing pants. But you can come to class in a toga or a bathrobe.
43. You know, the other day I realized that Americans are very huggy... when there’s Europeans trying to kiss you, you know, we’re just at work man.
44. Nobody writes, Warmly, best, Bill. You don’t call your professor Mr. Dr. Professor Tenen.
45. What about ritualistic murder? Are you into that?
47. Your ego is telling you to either love your neighbor or sexually harass your neighbor.
48. Elloh sehr. Can I please offerh you some candy?
49. The authentic self? Be real, man.
50. Sorry, I just came back, and uh, I’m trying to teach lit hum, oh, no, not lit hum.
