---
layout: about
permalink: /about/
title: "about"
---

> After the *n*-th time of writing a bio note in the NEH/NSF format I decided
to keep an updated copy here.

Dennis Tenen is an Assistant Professor in the [Department of English and
Comparative Literature, Columbia University][1]. His teaching and research
happen at the intersection of people, texts, and technology. A former software
engineer at Microsoft and currently faculty associate at the [Center for Data,
Media, and Society][2], he is the author of *[Plain Text: The Poetics of
Computation][3]* (Stanford University Press, 2017) and co-founder of
Columbia's [Group for Experimental Methods in the Humanities][4].

His recent work appears on the pages of Amodern, boundary 2, Computational
Culture, Modernism/modernity, Public Books, and LA Review of Books on topics
that range from book piracy to algorithmic composition, unintelligent design,
and history of data visualization. His current book-length project concerns
the limits of algorithmic imagination.

[1]: http://english.columbia.edu
[2]: http://datascience.columbia.edu/new-media
[3]: http://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=26821
[4]: http://xpmethod.plaintext.in

### Education

Tenen holds a degree in Comparative Literature (2011) from **Harvard
University** where he was awarded a Presidential Scholarship. Tenen was
additionally the recipient of a Research Computing in the Humanities
Fellowship, Merit Grant, Foreign Language and Area Studies Fellowship, and
Whiting Fellowship in the Humanities.

### Appointments & Affiliation

After graduation Tenen joined the fellows program at Harvard's [Berkman Klein
Center for Internet and Society][AA1]. He was an active participant in the
[Cooperation research group][AA3], under the direction of Yochai Benkler, and the
[metaLab research group][AA2] in Digital Humanities under the direction of
Jeffrey Schnapp.

[AA1]: https://cyber.harvard.edu/
[AA2]: http://www.metalabdesign.com/
[AA3]: https://cyber.harvard.edu/research/cooperation

In 2012, Tenen joined the faculty of Columbia's Department of English and
Comparative Literature. At Columbia, Tenen **co-founded the Group for
Experimental Methods in the Humanities**, where he also **directs the Literary
Modeling and Visualization Lab**. He is on the executive committee  of the
Institute for Comparative Literature and Society and affiliated faculty, at
the Institute of Data Sciences and Engineering, New Media Center.

Tenen is the recipient of multiple awards, including Presidential Global
Innovation grant, The Brown Center for Media Innovation Magic Grant and
Flagship, Lenfest Junior Faculty Development grant, and Heyman Center
Fellowship. His research has been featured on the pages of *The New York
Times*, *Le Monde*, *Der Spiegel*, and *Fast Company*.

### Publications

Tenen is the author of *Plain Text: The Poetics of Computation* (Stanford
University Press, 2017). The book takes up today's strange enmeshing of
humans, texts, and machines to argue that our most ingrained intuitions about
texts are profoundly alienated from the physical contexts of their
intellectual production. Drawing on a range of primary sources from both
literary theory and software engineering, he makes a case for a more
transparent practice of human–computer interaction. *Plain Text* is thus a
rallying call, a frame of mind as much as a file format. It reminds us,
ultimately, that our devices also encode specific modes of governance and
control that must remain available to interpretation.

His second book-length project, now in progress, explores the possibility and
limits of algorithmic literary systems. Machines both produce and "interpret"
a bulk of the world's textual output. Communication between spam bots and spam
filters, for example, resembles the conventional give-and-take between artists
and their critics, authors and censors. Relying on original research from the
annals of mathematics, aesthetics, and philosophy, Tenen connects recent
developments in computer science to a rich tradition of thought about
automated agents in the humanities. The book contributes to a broader
conversation on the role of algorithms in contemporary culture by presenting
an argument for an ethics of reading, writing, and living with machine texts.

Tenen's peer reviews articles include "Networks of the Avant Garde," (in
progress); "Diegetic Density: Towards a Computational Archaeology of Fictional
Space," (in progress); "Laminate Text: Material Contexts of Digital Knowledge
Production," (forthcoming in *Amodern*); "Unintelligent Design," (forthcoming
in *boundary 2*); "Book Piracy as Peer Preservation," (*Computational Culture
4*, 2014); "Sustainable Authorship in Plain Text," (*The Programming
Historian*, 2014), and "Stalin’s PowerPoint," (*Modernism/modernity 21.1*,
2014)

He contributed chapters to a number of collections including "Archive" in
*Literature: An Introduction to Theory and Analysis*; "Critical Computing in
the Humanities" in *Doing Digital Humanities: Practice, Training and
Research*; "Visual-quantitative Approaches to the Intellectual History of the
Field" in *Futures of Comparative Literature*; and "Blunt Instrumentalism" in
*Debates in the Digital Humanities*.

Tenen also writes for the popular press. His has published book reviews on
literature and technology in the *Los Angeles Review of Books*, *Design and
Culture*, and *Public Books*.

### Professional Service & Experience

Tenen draws from over a decade of experience as as software engineer. In the
late 1990s and early 2000s, he developed interfaces for a nascent mobile
communication market. In 2000 he joined WebTV as a user interface design
engineer, and later became a part of the Windows XP operating system team. His
code has reached millions of users.

Tenen regularly reviews book manuscripts for Cambridge UP, Columbia UP, MIT
Press, and Princeton UP and article manuscripts and grant applications for the
American Academy in Berlin, *Computational Culture*, *Digital Studies / Le
champ numérique*, *International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing*,
the National Science Foundation, *Modernism/Modernity*, and *Science,
Technology & Human Values*.

His recent consulting work includes projects with [*diller scofidio +
renfro*][PSE1] and the [Digital Storytelling Lab][PSE2].

[PSE1]: http://www.dsrny.com/
[PSE2]: http://www.digitalstorytellinglab.com/
