---
layout: post
slug: name
title: Goodbye Royal
categories:
- think.stack
---

I changed my name sometime in 2008, in part to celebrate my partner's heritage
and in part to signify a new start. It is a relatively trivial procedure in
the US, but I did not take it lightly. My reasoning was as follows:

1. I am a first-generation Soviet refugee, born in Moldavia, and for the
second decade now, an American citizen. The USSR is no longer a real place.
Since my family's departure, the republic of Moldavia gained independence,
changed its name, its official language, and its alphabet. My mother is of an
intermixed, post-WWII Eastern European stock, while my father is a Crimean
Jew. That makes me neither Russian, Jewish, Christian, nor Moldovan. If there
is an identity to be had from this personal history, it is an identity of an
immigrant. And like many immigrants before me, I change my name as an act of
renouncement, assimilation, and as a statement of independence from the forces
of historical contingency.

2. A year or so ago, I got married. Changing my name to reflect both mine and
my partner's heritage (she is Korean-American) makes sense for our children.
We reasoned that it would good to preserve both of our lineages, especially
for the future generations that may be curious about the history of both
families.

3. The practice of a family taking on the man's name while suppressing the
woman's felt strange to the both of us. Yi Tenen is perhaps unusual in that it
combines Korean and Yiddish roots—it is a hybrid name that we hope can honor
and give new life to both of our families.

Dennis Yi Tenen
