---
layout: post
title: Pandoc with Xelatex
categories:
- think.stack

---

A few notes after spending a some time battling with Pandoc, YAML, and the
Xelatex typesetting engine:

1. Theoretically it is easier to specify fontsize in the YAML block instead of
in the command line. You don't have to retype it each time and you can better
version control your attributes.

2. For book projects, where your YAML headers are reused, separate the YAML
block into its own file. Then pass both sources to concatenate. Something like
`pandoc -s metadata.yaml chapter1.md -o chapter1.pdf`.

3. Use the `--latex-engine=xelatex` option to work with languages other than
English. Make sure your tex editor supports the UTF-8 encoding.

4. However, when you use the Xelatex engine, the YAML attribute to change
default fonts switches from `fontfamily: ` to `mainfont:`. Doh! It was in the
docs. `man pandoc` for more.

5. When specifying the main font, put the font name in quotations like so:
`mainfont: "Day Roman"`.

6. You can find the LATEX font names in the excellent [Latex Font
Catalog](http://www.tug.dk/FontCatalogue/). Use the full name as shown above.

7. Long `pandoc` incantations are slightly tedious to type out. Use a shell
script to automate. You can find the one I use
[here](https://github.com/denten-bin/write-support/blob/master/print.sh). Note
that it expects you to pass a few arguments (everything is in the comments).

8. If none of this makes sense to you, read [this
first](http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/sustainable-authorship-in-plain-text-using-pandoc-and-markdown).

Hopefully these notes can save you a few moments of frustration.
