---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
title: Alternative Facts and the Misapplication of Reason
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
---

What is the difference between critical and conspiratorial thought?

My hobbies increasingly resemble my work. One way to take "time off" from
research is more research, on a different topic. There is no better way to
harness that feeling of surfing a deep archival flow, than to take on small,
investigative tasks for others. Writing in public offers an opportunity to use
university resources on behalf of someone who does not have access, to correct
the record, and to show, in some small way, the continual importance of the
humanities.

To these ends I participate in a number of online forums like Reddit's
excellent [AskHistorians][1] and [Skeptics][2] on Stack Exchange. Predictably,
my most popular answers relate to controversial topics related to Holocaust
denial or Islamophobia. Short answers to questions such as "[Have Islamic
prayers been introduced into Ontario public schools while Christian ones have
been removed?][3]" and "[Did the Nazis kill Jews with gas chambers?][4]"
gather the most votes, views, and discussion.[^5] More light-hearted topics
like "[Did the Ancient Egyptians use twenty-sided dice?][6]" and "[Do wild
dogs use trains to commute to and from Moscow?][7]"---yes and yes---are also
popular.

[1]: https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/
[2]: http://skeptics.stackexchange.com/
[3]: http://skeptics.stackexchange.com/questions/30599/have-islamic-prayers-been-introduced-into-ontario-public-schools-while-christian/30602#30602
[4]: http://skeptics.stackexchange.com/questions/30469/did-the-nazis-kill-jews-with-gas-chambers/30474#30474

[^5]: Page views total in the hundreds of thousands, according to site statistics.

[6]: http://skeptics.stackexchange.com/questions/16578/did-the-ancient-egyptians-use-twenty-sided-dice/16579#16579

[7]: http://skeptics.stackexchange.com/questions/15910/do-wild-dogs-use-trains-to-commute-to-and-from-moscow

Since this is my hobby, I tend not to editorialize or engage with incendiary
remarks. My goal is to provide a well-formed and well-sourced synthesis of the
scholarly consensus. Original work is better saved for peer review. It has
also been interesting to observe the kind of arguments that erupt in public,
particularly at a time when Americans are struggling to distinguish between
facts and alternative facts, news and fake news.

Both sides of these often ideological divides claim the legacy of critical
thought. Both appeal to our natural distrust of authority. They both express
reasoned doubt.

In a recent conversation, a particularly aggressive reader took issue with my
quoting the Oxford English Dictionary and figures from the United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum when fact checking a quote in *The Times of Israel*.
You are using the "current narrative," he wrote, to answer skepticism about
the current narrative. In his mind, the question about the veracity of a
specific source was really about the institution of the Holocaust more
generally. It could not be answered with other information, offered by the
same archivists or historians responsible for the original claim (which turned
out to be misleading in itself). The reader implied a radical skepticism,
directed against the discipline of history.

But what is the alternative? Who can give us "better" facts about what
happened? The answer cannot be other, less informed sources. The historical
record is never perfect or impartial. It does, however, present a
*preponderance of evidence*. In the case of Nazi use of gas chambers to
exterminate Jews, this means multiple independent accounts, court testimony,
archival documents, official and unofficial corroboration. In my answer, I
wrote that the available evidence represents "the testimony of hundreds, the
research and verification effort of thousands, and the experience of
millions." Any alternative theory would, at the very least, have to assemble a
similarly weighty case.

The enormity of the record underscores its collective nature. History, like
science, is a shared mass. It is the work of careful revision, by many people,
over a long period of time. It does not topple easily. A mere inconsistency
rearranges a grain of sand on top of a giant pyramid. The effort of debunking
it should be proportionate to the effort of its construction.

[8]: http://skeptics.stackexchange.com/questions/37020/did-5-million-non-jews-die-in-the-holocaust/37043#37043

Healthy skepticism therefore directs doubt towards the specifics. Critical
thought relies on the patient amassment of authoritative sources, which the
community then evaluates from different perspectives. With time, multiple acts
of interpretation assemble such facts to produce an explanatory chain of
causes and effects, the edifice of history.

By contrast, conspiratorial thinking dispenses with the notion of authority
and expertise itself. The doubt is directed not towards the specifics, but to
generalities. The whole enterprise of knowledge making is brought into
question at once, usually based on oblique hints, speculative conjecture,
insinuation, innuendo, or personal invective. Conspiracy theorists discard
widely accepted ideas on a whim. And ultimately, they take the Enlightenment
admonition to "think for yourself"[^9] only as an excuse to avoid thinking.

[^9]: Immanuel Kant wrote: "'Have the courage to use your own understanding,' is therefore the motto of the enlightenment." Recall also Martin Luther who called his ordinary fellow worshippers his "fellow priests," "free forever," able to "teach one another divine things."
