---
layout: post
title: Right to Repair is Right to Interpret
categories:
- think.stack
published: false
---

How is a tractor like a writing desk?

There are some metaphorical niceties in the comparison between reading and
writing, and reaping and sowing. Changes in technology that facilitate
physical contact between laborers and their element, be it a blank page or a
fallow field, bring farmers and literary scholars into a more direct,
non-figurative conversation, concerning the nature of electronic goods.

In the digital world, neither plow nor pen are subject purely to their
mechanics. Modern tractors like modern typewriters are also computers, which
means that these tools now contain an inward facing surface, marked by
inscription. Solid state memory arrays are machined out of silicon, ceramic,
palladium, platinum, silver and other precious metals. They are tiny
storehouses for information---programming instructions---which ultimately
govern the behaviour of the mechanism. The presence of such a surface and the
capability to respond to its commands is what differentiates "smart" devices
from their lackwit counterparts. The smart device, to paraphrase Marx, is one
that evolves, out of its silicon brain, grotesque ideas. It is a thing imbued
with potential for symbolic manipulation.

It should not surprise us then that protections usually reserved for
intellectual property have been expanded to cover such tangible goods as
harvesters and combines. In her essay "Freedom to Tinker," Pamela Samuelson,
of Berkeley Law, described the now infamous attempt by John Deere, a major
international maker of agricultural machinery, to restrict access to the
innards of its machines, thus severely limiting its customers' ability to
repair their own equipment.[^1] Organizations such as the Electronic Frontier
Foundation and repair.org have mobilized politically, resulting in "right to
repair" bills adopted into law in at least 11 states, including New York and
Massachusetts.[^2]

These bills are important to me as a literary scholar, because the right to
repair implies, physically, the right to read, write, and interpret
inscription implicit in all smart devices, including those on our writing
desks. Like farmers, all those who read and write at a computer are faced with
a threat of critical disempowerment. The practice of literary hermeneutics,
the interpretation of texts, in all of its varied traditions, cannot take
place when access to inscription is physically curtailed. Think of it as an
ultimate form of political censorship, not by decree, but by material design.
Solid state drives are sealed hermetically and therefore hermeneutically.
What one sees at the surface of a screen is part of a more complex, laminate
figure which extends across surfaces: some near the reader and other remote,
inches and sometimes continents away from the site of interpretation. The
electronic book in my palm has its origins on servers guarded by armed men in
Ohio, Northern Virginia, Mumbai, and São Paulo.[^3]

"Literary analysis should awaken to the importance of media-specific analysis,
a mode of critical attention which recognizes that all texts are instantiated
and that the nature of the medium in which they are instantiated matters,"
N. Katherine Hayles wrote in *Poetics Today* more than a decade ago.[^3] These
   words, along with other pioneering works by materially-minded textual
scholars---Johanna Drucker, Matthew Kirschenbaum, and Jerome McGann among
others---have motivated my approach to writing *Plain Text: The Poetics of
Computation* (Stanford UP, 2017).

What are the media specifics of text instantiated on digital screens? In
answering that question, I have relied on a number of archival sources that
point to an intellectual legacy shared between the history of literary thought
and the history of modern computing. In this way, I show that the very idea of
a Turing machine, crucial to the development of computer science, owes its
origins to a series of thought experiments about the nature of textual
interpretation in the work of Ludwig Wittgenstein. Elsewhere, I discuss the
influence of metaphor theory in the practice of user interface design, as
reflected in the thought of Brenda Laurel, Donald Norman, Edwin Hutchins and
other proponents of the "direct manipulation" movement, which gave us the
familiar "windows," "folders," "scroll bars," and "trash cans" on screen. I
show how the very mechanics of cathode ray tube and liquid crystal displays
affect the apprehension of digital media, including text, which moves on
screen, at the limits of "critical flicker fusion" in excess of 60 times per
second, even as it appears to stand still.

What happens when farmers lose the right to handle soil or to fix their tools?
What happens to writers who lose touch with pen and page? Can the practice of
literary interpretation persist in alienation from the material contexts of
knowledge production? These are not theoretical questions, but matters of
tactical expediency. The politics of inscription are a matter of grave concern
to farmer laborers, software engineers, and textual scholars alike. They
require a concerted effort to more closely align our ideals with technologies
at hand.

In *Plain Text* I wrote:

> The politics of inscription are not simply a matter for academic discussion.
In the time that it took me to finish this book, a coalition of US "data
dissidents" won a temporary exemption from the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act to allow them to modify their medical implants. It included Hugo Campos,
who wanted to access data collected by his Implantable Cardioverter
Defibrillator, and Ben West and Jay Radcliffe who fought for the right to
modify their implanted insulin pumps. Marie Moe, of Norway, similarly
struggled to rewrite her heart implant's software. "I want to know what code
is running inside of my body," she said. "Medical devices are black boxes,"
she continued, "you can't look into them, there's no transparency, we don't
know how they work."[^5]

> In Pakistan, the American National Security agency-sponsored Skynet program
has placed people on the US-sanctioned "disposition matrix" or "kill list"
based on predictive analytics: social network analysis, cellular machine
learning, patterns of travel and telephone use. Automated tools with names
like SMARTTRACKER, SMARTCHART, and Cloud Travel Analytic select people for
target strikes by unmanned areal vehicles.[^6] Our ability to interpret codes
that kill on our behalf also stems from our capacity to access them, read,
understand, modify, and publish criticism.

> Readers everywhere are engaged in a *political* struggle to control and deploy
codified resources. The heart and the sky are sites on which the tactics of
inscription are increasingly contested. The right to access the internals of a
device is intrinsically related to the right to interpret it. An engaged and
literate public requires the ability to keep mechanisms of power in plain
view, amendable to commentary and continual interpretation.

Dennis Yi Tenen
Mexico City, June 2017

[^1]: Samuelson, Pamela. “Freedom to Tinker.” Theoretical Inquiries in Law 17, no. 2 (2016): 562–600.

[^2]: https://web.archive.org/web/20170614215039/https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/12/john-deere-really-doesnt-want-you-own-tractor

[^3]: Hayles, N. Katherine. “Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific Analysis.” Poetics Today 25, no. 1 (March 20, 2004): 67–90.

[^4]: Recent important contributions to critical infrastructure studies
include Starosielski, Nicole. *The Undersea Network*. Durham: Duke University
Press Books, 2015 and Hu, Tung-Hui. A Prehistory of the Cloud. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015 and Hu, Tung-Hui. *A Prehistory of the
Cloud*. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015.

[^5]: See McGowan, Kat. “I Want to Know What Code Is Running Inside My Body.”
Medium Backchannel, February 11, 2016.
https://backchannel.com/i-want-to-know-what-code-is-running-inside-my-body-ff9a159da34b
and Sellars, Andrew. “Petition of a Coalition of Medical Device Researchers
for Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems
for Access Control Technologies.” Cambridge  Mass., July 2014.

[^6]: Neal, Gregory S. “Targeted Killing and Accountability.” SSRN Scholarly
Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, March 5, 2014 and
Weber, Jutta. “Keep Adding. On Kill Lists, Drone Warfare and the Politics of
Databases.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 34, no. 1 (February
1, 2016): 107–25.

