---
author: denten
layout: post
published: true
title: Towards a Computational Archaeology of Fictional Space (an excerpt)
categories:
- think.stack
---

> An introduction to an article accepted to *New Literary History* in summer
> of 2017. Cite as Dennis Yi Tenen, "Towards a Computational Archaeology of
> Fictional Space," forthcoming in *New Literary History*.

Space is a hard thing to pin down. It identifies dimensional continuity and a
topography, that is, a relationship between objects. It is also itself an
object: a limit-defining quantity even in its most abstract sense. "O God, I
could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite space, were
it that I have bad dreams," Hamlet says of his ambition and his dreams.[^66] A
human palm can be a part of the body or a map. A mirror is a piece of
furniture and a frame for reflection. Under extreme magnification, the head of
a pin appears a vast and mountainous terrain, home to angels and bacterial
detritus. The characterization of diegetic---let us call it also virtual and
fictional---space presents further difficulties. A stretch of land in fiction
measures also a stretch of the imagination. These units do not always have
names or explicit boundaries. Vladimir and Estragon wait for Godot: "A country
road. A tree."[^67] Two vectors are enough to situate the world. A road gives
us the X and a tree the Y axis: an infinity in a nutshell.[^49]

In this paper I propose to reconsider theories of diegetic space which rely on
explicit framing (i.e. "two people walk into a room" or "in Spain"). Rather
than looking for maps, I define space in terms of grammatical categories
denoting objects. The emphasis on objects leads to a method for literary
archaeology, informed by cognitive theory and anthropology. If the universe is
made of atoms, a fictional world is also made up of atomic relationships that
form basic, stable configurations, or, what I call, narratological primitives.
I construct several such basic spatial buildings blocks here---diegetic
density and narrative clutter. Their application to a well-explored body of
Victorian novels challenges several long standing historical intuitions
related to the development of material culture in the nineteenth century.

A theoretic reconfiguration grounds a descriptive method: a model by which
fictional space can be, if not fixed, then approximated. Further, following
Lisa Samuels, Jerome McGann, Johanna Drucker, and others, I am interested in
literary modeling and visualization as kinds of a transformative reading
practice. The formal, computational methods I present here are not meant to
prove anything. They are first and foremost exploratory and experimental
tools. They occasion opportunities for close reading or "reading against the
grain" and not just reading at scale. My methods are diagnostic, in that they
identify areas of interest and unusual trends that require closer critical
attention.

An undercurrent and a starting place of this essay is therefore also a
critique of a certain mode of quantitative literary analysis, which
essentially advances a number of complex methodological procedures to
arbitrary effects. Formalists old and new are perpetually and cyclically in
danger of falling into the trap set by Stanley Fish in the 1970s. Fish
cautioned that a relation can always be found between any number of low-level,
formal features of a text and a given high-level account of its meaning. For
example, the use of past participles or gerunds may rise and fall with the
vagaries of literary style. Or it may be due to changing archive collection
practices over time: sample bias. As Fish puts it: "there are always formal
patterns" and "a relation will always be found."[^68] This is astute. Methods
will always produce results. The difficulty lies in filtering meaning from the
noise. A whole subset of statistical methods---causal analysis---is dedicated
to this problem. It involves, perhaps unsurprisingly, explanatory frameworks
that chart a partway between dependent and independent variables. Methods
require theory. A tautological formula cannot in itself produce meaning: one
must have an a priori idea about what is meaningful. Correlations become more
convincing with the interpretation of causes. Analytics, in other words, are
meaningless without poetics.

To get past Fish, we must first understand the difference between prediction
and explanation. Karl Popper wrote that the aim of theoretical science is to
find "explanatory theories [...] which describe certain structural properties
of the world."[^1] A theoretical interest in explanation is non-instrumental,
insofar as it is "irreducible to the practical technological interest in the
deduction of predictions."[^2] A diagram of a storm weather system holds
explanatory and not just a predictive power. In fact, it does not describe any
specific weather systems at all, past or future. Rather, a diagram teaches us
something about the relationship between causes and effects: high pressure,
condensation, wind, and rain. To understand how something works---to form a
theory---further entails the possibility of effecting systemic change. To
understand disease pathology is also to imagine ways of inhibiting it. In this
way, explanatory models reach beyond the apparent phenomenon: from what is to
what might be. Models contain the remainder of the real, which is poiesis
itself, creativity.[^4] What is the point of theory? one might ask. There is
none, Popper answers. Theory is a storehouse of potential applications,
knowledge for knowledge's sake.

Even a simple forecast places ideational constructs in relation to the
empirical world. Predictive power and explanatory power reciprocate one
another. To predict is also to imagine, albeit in a more directed, fully
potentiated way. Pattern recognition suffices for this purpose. One can
forecast the sun will rise each day based on past experience without knowing
anything about planetary mechanics. Patterns allow us to extrapolate from
known contexts to similar unknown ones. A weather model (of earth) will
produce accurate predictions provided that the planet remains more or less the
same.

Not all theories are predictive, however. The interpretation of historical
events involves an account of singular causes and effects that do not repeat
in the same configuration. The interpretation of literary texts also hinges on
deeply contextualized, affective, or embodied dynamics. Predictive power may
or may not be necessary to understand how a text works, where explanatory
power is. To know how texts work, in the echoing words of Percy Lubbock, Boris
Eichenbaum, and Susan Sontag, is the essence of poetics.

I offer these reflections on method on route to an argument about cultural
analytics---the application of computational methods to the study of
literature and culture---generally, and, more specifically, in an attempt to
outline some strategies for explanatory modeling of space in literary texts.
Some research questions, I maintain, are amenable to predictive analysis.
Others require explanatory power. The two complimentary approaches involve
different logics and modes of argumentation. It is important however, to
differentiate clearly between the two. The worst kind of error is one where
predictive results are taken for explanatory ones: the sun will continue to
rise because it has been rising regularly. The "because" is unwarranted. We
must not mistake mere extrapolation for an account of deep causes and effects.
The understanding of culture, to paraphrase Clifford Geertz, cannot be limited
to pattern recognition. It is rather an interpretive effort, "in search of
meaning."[^3] As such, it requires other attributes besides statistical
significance or convenience, such as simplicity, novelty, and persuasiveness.
An explanatory, interpretive model does not just extrapolate, it produces
insight.

[^66]: William Shakespeare, Hamlet: Revised Edition, Edited by Ann Thompson and Neil Taylor (London: Bloomsbury Arden Shakespeare, 2016), 496.

[^67]: Samuel Beckett and S. E. Gontarski, Waiting for Godot (New York: Grove Press, 2010): 3.

[^49]: I thank <!--- Nicholas Dames, Sierra Eckert, Jonathan Reeve, Milan Terlunen ---> [redacted for peer review] and other members of <!--- Columbia's Literary Modeling and Visualization ---> [redacted for peer review] lab for their comments on an early draft of this paper.

[^68]: Stanley Fish, “What Is Stylistics and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible Things about It?-Part II,” Boundary 2, 8:1 (1979): 132 and 144. See also Stanley Fish, “Literature in the Reader: Affective Stylistics.” New Literary History 2, no. 1 (1970): 123–62; and Stanley Fish, “What Is Stylistics and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible Things about It?” in Is There a Text in This Class?: The Authority of Interpretive Communities (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980): 21–68.

[^1]: Karl Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery (New York: Harper & Row, 1968), 40.

[^2]: Popper, Scientific Discovery, 40.

[^3]: Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays (New York: Basic Books, 1973), 5.

[^4]: In his "Observations, Explanatory Power, and Simplicity" Richard Boyd writes about the excess of the scientific method as follows: "The standards for theory assessment [...] required by those features of scientific methodology are, at least apparently, so different from those set by the requirement that the predictions of theories must be sustained by observational tests, that it is, initially at least, puzzling what they have to do with the rational scientific assessment of theories or with scientific objectivity." See Richard Boyd, Philip Gasper, and J. D Trout, The Philosophy of Science (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 350.
