---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
title: A Translation of Yuri Olesha's "Liompa" (1928)
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
---

The boy Alexander whittled a piece of wood in the kitchen. Golden, delicious
peels covered his scuffed hands.

The kitchen opened into a yard. It was spring: doors would not shut, grass
grew by the stoop, spilled water glistened against the rocks. A rat took
refuge in the trash bin. Someone was frying potatoes. A kerosene stove was
lit. The life of the stove began lavishly, in a plume of fire that reached to
the ceiling. It died in a tiny blue flame. A neighbor boiled crabs. He would
use two fingers to grab a crab by its waist. The crabs bore a greenish tinge
reminiscent of the plumbing. Suddenly, a few drops of water escaped the
faucet. The faucet snorted. Its pipes rattled back and forth in various
voices. Dusk took shape at once. Through the wicket gate in the yard a lone
glass tumbler on the windowsill received the last rays of the sun. The faucet
continued to grumble. A varied crackle and stir commenced around the stove.

Twilight was splendid. People ate sunflowers; someone sang. A domestic, yellow
light fell onto the sidewalk, brightly illuminating the stand of a food
vendor.

A critically ill man by the name of Ponomarev lay alone in a room next to the
kitchen. A candle burned. A doctor's script marked the flagon of medicine
above his head. When friends visited, Ponomarev would say:

"Congratulate me, I am dying."

A delirium took him in the evening. The doctor's script stretched like a
ribbon. The medicine flask stared. It turned into a royal bride named
*Onomastica*.[^2] The patient was hallucinating. He wanted to write a
scholarly treatise. He conversed with his blanket.

"Are you not ashamed?" he chastised it in a whisper.

The blanket would sit beside him, lie next to him, exit on occasion, and
return with news.

He was surrounded by a few things: his medicine, a spoon, light, wallpaper.
Other things left him. When he understood that he was critically ill and that
he was dying, he also understood how great and varied was the world of things
and how little of it had remained under his control. With every day their
numbers diminished. A near thing like a rail ticket was now irreversibly
distant. At first, the quantity of things diminished at the periphery, far
from him. The diminishing then approached, at a rapidly increasing pace, into
the yard, house, hallway, into his room, and toward his center, to him, toward
the heart.

Initially, the disappearance of things did not cause him much distress.

Whole continents of possibility disappeared as a matter of old age: the
Americas, the possibility of being rich or good looking, the prospect of a
family (he was single). Real pain came when he saw that even those objects
that followed regularly beside him were receding. So one day left the street,
the concept of work, post office, and horses. The vanishing accelerated
nearby, close at hand. The corridor was already out of reach and in his very
room, before his eyes, his overcoat, door latch, and shoes slipped from his
grasp. He knew that death was destroying things on the way to him. From a
world of their vast and easy quantity she left him only a few, and those that,
if it were up to him, he would never let into his household. He received a
bedpan. He received the terrible visits and looks from his friends. He was
powerless to resist these unsolicited and unwanted (as he always thought)
possessions. They were singular and indispensable now. He lost the right to
choose his things.

The boy Alexander was tinkering with a model airplane.

He was more complicated and more serious than others thought of him. He cut
his fingers, bled, littered his wood chips, left glue streaks, begged for
silk,[^1] cried, and got whacked upside the head. Adults thought themselves in
the absolute right. Meanwhile, the boy's actions were completely mature. More
than that, he acted as few adults can: in total agreement with science. His
model was built according to blueprint. Calculations were made. The boy
understood the underlying principles. He could object to the harassment of his
elders with rational explanations and with experimental results, but he
remained silent, because he did not feel justified in appearing more serious
than them.

Around the boy were arranged bands of rubber, wire, wood planks, silk, airy
wisps of silk fabric, and the smell of glue. The sky sparkled. Insects walked
on stone. Embedded into the stone one could see a hardened shell.

The boy at work would be approached by another, smaller child: tiny and mostly
naked except for his blue elastic skivvies. The toddler touched stuff and was
in the way. Alexander ousted him regularly. The naked elastic toddler roamed
the house and the corridor where a bicycle stood, resting a pedal to one side
of the wall. (The pedal left a scrape on the wallpaper---it was as if the
bicycle held onto the wall by that scrape.)

When the toddler visited the sick man, his head bobbed up and down at the
broadsides of the bed. Ponomarev's temples were pale, like a blind man's. The
child approached bluntly to examine them. He thought nothing of it. The world
was always so: bearded men were supposed to lie on beds in rooms. He was just
beginning to enter the understanding of things and could not yet distinguish a
difference in their duration.

The toddler turned and started to march around the room. He saw floor tiles,
dust under the baseboards, cracks in the wall plaster. Lines converged and
diverged around him. Bodies came to life. A focal point of light appeared
suddenly. The boy rushed towards it, but no sooner that he took a step, the
shape dissolved due to a change in perspective. The child looked for it---up
and down, behind the furnace. He searched and finally gave up, perplexed,
shrugging his shoulders. Every moment created a new entity. Wondrous was the
spider. It flittered away at a mere thought of a touch.

For the dying man, things that departed left only their names.

There was an apple in the world, shining in the foliage. It spun slightly and
took with it a few shreds of the day, the blueness of the garden, and the
window transom. Gravity was in wait under the tree, on black soil, among the
knolls. Beaded ants scurried among the knolls. Newton sat in the garden. A
multitude of causes capable of producing many more effects concealed
themselves inside the apple. But not one of those effects were meant for
Ponomarev. The apple became an abstraction for him. And the fact that its
matter escaped him while the abstraction remained was painful to consider.

"I thought the external world does not exist," he pondered. "I thought it was
my eye and my ear that ruled objects and I thought the world would cease to
exist when I cease. Now I see that everything is turning away from me, even
while I am still alive. But I exist, still! Why then do these objects
disappear? I thought it was my brain that gave them form, weight, and color.
They left me nevertheless, and only their names---useless, abandoned
names---swarm around my head. And what am I to do with these names?"

Ponomarev looked wistfully at the marching toddler, who walked and who was
enveloped by things that rushed toward him. He smiled at them without knowing
their names. A lush wake of things would break behind him when he left.

"Listen," the sick man called to the child. "Listen... You. Know that all this
will be gone when I die, neither yard, nor tree, nor daddy, nor mommy. I will
take them all with me."

A rat got into the kitchen.

The man concentrated on the sounds the rat made as it went about its chores,
clanked the dishes, opened the faucet, and rustled in the bucket.

"Washing the dishes, eh?" he thought.

At once a restless thought came to him: What if, unbeknownst to people, the
rat had a name? He began to imagine what it could be. He was delirious. The
more he thought about it the more afraid he became. He understood that he
must, by all means, stop thinking about the rat's name and yet he continued,
knowing that at the very moment this nonsensical and horrifying name would
appear to him, he would die.

"Liompa!" he suddenly screamed in a terrible voice. The house slept. It was
early morning, a few minutes past six. The boy Alexander did not sleep. The
kitchen door was left open into the yard. The sun was still somewhere beneath.
Crooked at the waist, the dying man walked through the kitchen. His limp
wrists burdened his already heavy, outstretched hands. He came to take his
things. The boy Alexander ran through the yard. A model airplane flew ahead.
It was the last thing Ponomarev saw. It flew away before he could take it.

A long blue box decorated in yellow appeared in the kitchen later that day.
The elastic toddler watched it from the corridor, his hands folded behind his
back. It had to be tediously manipulated to get it through the door, getting
stuck against the shelf and hitting a pot as bits of plaster fell. The boy
Alexander climbed on top of the stove to help. When the box came through
finally, into the corridor, turning black at once there, the toddler stomped
ahead.

"Grandpa! Grandpa," he yelled. "They brought you a casket."

### Translator's Notes:

Olesha's prose is characterized by choppy, hypnotic, often repetitive diction,
lean descriptive lists, and idiosyncratic idiom. The author punctuates short,
sentences containing clinically precise description, with flights of lyrical
estrangement in which simple things are described in unfamiliar, jarring ways.
A sense of melancholy haunts this story, conveyed through ambiguous
grammatical constructs that waver between the simple and the habitual past
tense. In this way, Olesha purposefully blurs the lines between "the boy
approached" and "the boy would often approach." Such scenes seem to have
happened once and to have always been happening continuously, creating a sense
of eternal time which transcends the specificity of narrative placement. The
rural house comes alive through careful detail, yet lives on as an archetype.
I tried to preserve and prioritize these features in translation, where
possible.

Previous translations (out of print) include:

- Oleša, Jurij K, and Aimee Anderson. Complete Short Stories & Three Fat Men.
  Ann Arbor, Mich: Ardis, 1979.

- Yarmolinsky, Avrahm. Russians: Then and Now: A Selection of Russian Writing
  from the Seventeenth Century to Our Own Day. New York: Macmillan, 1963.

A few select tools are essential for my translation workflow. The first of
these is [multitran.ru][4], a remarkable online meta-aggregation of high
quality Soviet-era Russian/English dictionaries which deserves a media
archaeology of its own. In addition I use the following common resources:

- *Oxford English Dictionary Online*. The online version includes full
  etymological entries, which are important in reconstructing English
approximates of phrasing that relies on a sense of the Russian root form.

- Dal's *Russian Etymological Dictionary*. Same as above. Dal's is the golden
  standard in Russian etymology.

- *Oxford American Writer's Thesaurus*. It is usually on my desk, although
  writers like Olesha tend toward plain, colloquial expression. I did not have
much need of it in this translation.

- *Garner's Modern American Usage* is my go-to guide through tricky
  grammatical or stylistic terrain. Garner finds the right balance between
proscription and description, and that with a sense of humor and humility that
makes this reference work a pleasure to read.

It is worth noting that, according to Russian Federation [Federal Law
N230-F3][3] (03.07.2016), copyright of literary creative works applies
retroactively for 70 years after publication. Olesha's "Liompa," published in
1928, therefore entered the public domain in 1998.

*Mexico City*    
*June 2017*

### Footnotes

[^1]: Silk was (and still is now, in the hobbyist community) commonly used to create an aerodynamic surface around an airplane wing or an aileron. See for example "How to Silk a Model Aircraft Wing" on *Airfield Models*: <https://web.archive.org/web/20170614043457/http://www.airfieldmodels.com/information_source/how_to_articles_for_model_builders/finishing_techniques/silk_a_wing/index.htm>

[^2]: The Russian *тезоименитство* is derived from an Old Church Slavonic root and means "namesake day," a holiday distinct from one's birthday celebrated in Christian Orthodox and Catholic traditions. It is not a common word. I chose the similarly uncommon (in English) Greek-derived name for the holiday: *onomastico* in Italian and *ονομαστική γιορτή* in Greek. Names and naming of objects are a major theme in the story.

[3]: <https://web.archive.org/web/20170614044547/http://pravo.gov.ru/proxy/ips/?docbody=&nd=102161337>

[4]: https://mutitran.ru
