---
layout: post
title: Right to Repair is Right to Interpret
categories:
- think.stack
published: true
---

<sub>Published in a more extended version at [Stanford University Press
blog](http://stanfordpress.typepad.com/blog/2017/07/right-to-repair-is-right-to-interpret.html).</sub>

How is a tractor like a writing desk?

Some metaphorical insight is to be gained in the comparison between reading
and writing, and reaping and sowing. Changes in technology that facilitate
physical contact between laborers and their element, be it a blank page or a
fallow field, bring farmers and literary scholars into a more direct,
non-figurative conversation, concerning the nature of electronic goods.

In the digital world, neither plow nor pen is subject purely to their
mechanics. Modern tractors like modern typewriters are also computers, which
means that these tools now contain an inward facing surface, marked by
inscription. Solid-state memory arrays are machined out of silicon, ceramic,
palladium, platinum, silver and other precious metals. They are tiny
storehouses for information—programming instructions—which ultimately govern
the behavior of the mechanism. The presence of such a surface and the
capability to respond to its commands is what differentiates "smart" devices
from their lackwit counterparts. To paraphrase Marx, the smart device is one
that evolves grotesque ideas out of its silicon brain. It is a thing imbued
with potential for symbolic manipulation.

It should not surprise us then that protections usually reserved for
intellectual property have been expanded to cover such tangible goods as
harvesters and combines. In her essay "Freedom to Tinker," Pamela Samuelson,
of Berkeley Law, described the now infamous attempt by John Deere, a major
international maker of agricultural machinery, to restrict access to the
innards of its machines, thus severely limiting its customers' ability to
repair their own equipment. Organizations such as the Electronic Frontier
Foundation and repair.org have mobilized politically, resulting in "right to
repair" bills adopted into law in at least eleven states, including New York
and Massachusetts.

These bills are important to me as a literary scholar, because the right to
repair implies, physically, the right to read, write, and interpret
inscription implicit in all smart devices, including those on our writing
desks. Like farmers, all those who read and write at a computer are faced with
a threat of critical disempowerment. The practice of literary hermeneutics,
the interpretation of texts, in all of its varied traditions, cannot take
place when access to inscription is physically curtailed. Think of it as an
ultimate form of political censorship, not by decree, but by material design.
Solid-state drives are sealed hermetically and therefore hermeneutically.

What one sees at the surface of a screen is part of a more complex, laminate
figure that extends across surfaces: some near the reader and others remote,
inches and sometimes continents away from the site of interpretation. The
electronic book in my palm has its origins on servers guarded by armed men in
Ohio, Northern Virginia, Mumbai, and São Paulo.

"Literary analysis should awaken to the importance of media-specific analysis,
a mode of critical attention which recognizes that all texts are instantiated
and that the nature of the medium in which they are instantiated matters," N.
Katherine Hayles [wrote in Poetics
Today](http://poeticstoday.dukejournals.org/content/25/1/67.full.pdf+html)
more than a decade ago. These words, along with other pioneering works by
materially-minded textual scholars—Johanna Drucker, Matthew Kirschenbaum, and
Jerome McGann among others—have motivated my approach to writing [Plain Text:
The Poetics of Computation](http://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=26821).

<sub>Read the rest at [Stanford University Press
blog](http://stanfordpress.typepad.com/blog/2017/07/right-to-repair-is-right-to-interpret.html).</sub>
