---
author: denten
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
title: Archives
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
---


> What are the minimal requirements to build an archive? How does a pile of
haphazardly arranged papers differ from an archive? Look around you and notice
the furniture; navigate through your mobile device where you keep your notes
and your photos. Think of your social media usage, your habits of
correspondence, the way you keep in touch with your family and friends, the
habits of keeping a journal, taking notes, finding basic facts about the
world. All of these involve an archive of some kind. We are surrounded by
archives; we live in them and through them. Archives mediate. Like water for
fish, they form the medium of our knowledge gathering and finding activity.
If, as the headlines tell us, we live in an information age, archives are a
way of making sense of that information. More than making sense, they help
keep information *at hand*. An archive is a way of ordering things. It is a
site of mental as a well as physical activity.

> Think of the archive as an interface between internal mental states---what I
know now---and the external, physical representation of that knowledge---what
I could know at any time. The book on my bookshelf is not just a book, it is a
part of my mental furnishings. I may not remember the contents of that book
for long, but I know where it is and how to find it. I know I could get to it
if needed.  It is not as close to me as a memory, accessible immediately and
at once, but also not as far as an obscure fact with which I have never had
any contact. The book on my shelf, the notebook in a pile on my desk, occupies
a space somewhere in the middle of the spectrum, between my rather limited
ability to remember a few ideas presently and the unlimited amount of ideas
out there. My documents, the ones that belong to me, the ones I organized
neatly on my desk and on my virtual desktop, are ideas that I used to have.
They are also a part of me, but just slightly farther away and outside of
myself than my thoughts. I feel safe knowing where they are and how to find
them.

Read the rest of the essay in *[Literature: An Introduction to Theory and
Analysis][1]*, edited by Mads Thomsen, et.al. Bloomsbury Academic, 2017.

[1]: https://www.amazon.com/Literature-Kj%C3%A6ldgaard-Ringgaard-Simonsen-Rosendahl-ebook/dp/B01MY95MXR/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8


