---
layout: post
title: How to Publish Leaked Materials Safely
categories:
- think.stack
published: true
---

This is a short post addressing some of the appropriate security protocols
that could be followed when publishing leaked information, in order to better
protect the identity of a leaker.

A printed document can be connected to its source in at least two different
ways:

1. The physical medium (e.g. paper) might contain invisible tracing inks or
   microscopic markers. For example, many modern printers will mark the paper
with tiny patterns that capture a device's serial number along with the date
of a printout. By publishing a scan of the original documents (related to
election hacking) in June of 2016, *The Intercept* may have inadvertently
revealed the identity of their source.<sup>1</sup> Similarly, metadata
embedded in a Microsoft Word file may contain identifying information
including names, places, and dates.

2. The formatting of the text itself may include invisible characters, small
   spacing alterations, purposeful misalignment, signature letter deformities,
or letter substitutions (the Cyrillic "а" instead of an English "a") that make
even a digital copy (copy and paste) of the text not safe for reproduction.

To address such a variety of potential attack vectors, a publisher can take
steps to minimize exposure to original media and formatting. While it is
possible to apply sophisticated computational techniques such as image filters
or fuzzing to add to or remove noise from original documents---simple,
low-cost, low-fidelity methods would likely be more robust and more effective
in the long term.

Do not publish originals. Re-mediation is key. The safest course is to retype
and re-typeset the document by hand, using one's own equipment. When
authenticity of documents is desired, original scans may be printed and
rescanned using a copy machine's lowest quality "noisy" settings. Documents
received in Microsoft Word format may be converted to PDF, and the other way
around. Making a crumpled "ball of paper" out of a document and then
flattening it out (roughly) and rescanning introduces new variations in
spacing and line alignment.

It is important to understand that no single method or combination of methods
can guarantee complete security. The best course of action is to **institute a
protocol consisting of several steps,** adhering to it as a matter of policy.

For example, a reasonable course of action might involve (a) converting
received digital content into another format, (b) printing it locally,
(c) physical deformation, and (c) quality reduction pass via low-fidelity
    scanning.  The order of protocol steps and the tools used for the task
matter. For this reason it is important for your staff to receive appropriate
training and to **have your protocols audited independently**.


<sup> 1. <https://web.archive.org/web/20180101230942/http://blog.erratasec.com/2017/06/how-intercept-outed-reality-winner.html>
</sup>





