---
layout: post
title: Research Proposal Guidelines
categories:
- think.stack
published: true
---

> I wrote the following document for the [undergraduate concentration in
Comparative Literature](https://perma.cc/HRR8-DA7M) at Harvard University a
few years ago. I was glad to hear recently that students and faculty at
University College London also found it useful. An updated and versioned copy
of the document can be found here. Please feel free to reuse with appropriate
acknowledgements, linking to this post or [its
sources](https://github.com/denten/denten.github.io/blob/master/_posts/2018-07-01-research-proposal-guide.md).

## How to Write a Good Research Proposal

Many research proposals I read begin with a set of propositions or a thesis.
But don’t you find it strange to offer conclusions before the actual work of
collecting, organizing, and synthesizing the material? To my mind, it is more
reasonable to think about the proposal as a plan for research--a document that
poses questions, rather than answering them.  If that makes sense to you, I
suggest your proposal contain a concise treatment of the following (in any
order):

*What has prompted your interest in the topic?*

The purpose of the first paragraph is to ease your audience into the field of
your research.  A small case-study, a quotation, or an anecdote can be used to
create a reader-friendly "point-of-departure," which introduces the reader to
the range of questions that motivate your work.

*What kinds of questions will you be asking?*

What is your problematic?  What philosophical, literary, social, ideological,
or historical problems will your work engage? What kinds of questions do not
interest you?  What categories of thought and critical assumptions involved?

*How do your questions fit into a broader intellectual tradition?*

What is the tradition of answering these types of questions?  Where do you
expect to continue or break with the tradition?

*How will you answer your questions?*

What are your methods? Close reading?  Distant reading? Interviews?  Archival
research?  Text analysis?  Be practical and specific here.

*Where will you look for your answers?*

Create a sense of your archive.  What kind of materials will you be looking
for (literary, legal, scientific)?  What period?  What language?  What medium?
What genre?  Where is it? How will you get to it and when? This could be as
simple as "Ulysses, by James Joyce,” the graphic novel collection at Butler
Library, or as complicated as "Comparative traditions of Medieval Slavonic
hagiography." What are the biases implicit in your archive or dataset? What
kind of things are included or excluded?

*What kind of answers do you anticipate?*

What do you expect this material to tell you?  What form do you expect your
thesis to take?  How might you structure your writing?  What possible problems
(theoretical, practical, or otherwise) could stand in the way of your
analysis?

*A plan of action.*

Identify any gaps you have.  Describe work completed (if any).  Come up with a
reasonable timeline.  Suggest per-week, per-month, per-semester goals and
milestones.
