---
layout: post
title: "Be Water (On BLM)"
categories:
- think.stack
published: true
---

This spring (before the George Floyd protests, but after Breonna Taylor and so many others) in
my [Contemporary Civilization class][1] we ended the semester by reading W. E. B. Du Bois,
Franz Fanon, James Baldwin, and Zora Neale Hurston among those who wrote so powerfully about
race in the 20th century. These voices stay with me through the summer, resonating ever more
urgently in light of recent events.

"The Nation has not yet found peace for its sins" Du Bois wrote of the color line, which
continues to serve as a "concrete test of the underlying principles of a great republic"—its
"unattained ideals" and "systematic humiliation" (*Souls of Black Folk*, 1903).

In another time and place Fanon spoke about "a reign of terrible violence," "the violence of the
colonial regime and the counter-violence of the native" that "balance each other & respond to
each other" in an "extraordinary reciprocity" (*The Wretched of the Earth*, 1963).

"I know my situation cannot be endured," Baldwin spoke in a conversation with Margaret
Mead about the state of policing in Harlem, "I know their role in my life" he said, "and I will
not accept it [...] The cops aren't going to ask me my name before they pull the trigger" (*A Rap
on Race*, 1971).

"Besides the waters of the Hudson, I feel my race" Hurston wrote from Barnard, "I am a dark
rock surged upon, and overswept, but through it all I remain myself.  When covered by the
waters, I am; and the ebb but reveals me again" (*How It Feels to Be Colored Me*, 1928).

We read and walked by the Hudson too (almost a century later)—the river still significant
with the echoes of the night protest.


[1]: https://github.com/denten-courses/con-civ/tree/master/2020-spring
