---
layout: post
title: "Historical Materialism: Introduction"
categories:
- think.stack
published: true
---

I was recently asked to contribute a chapter on historical materialism for the *Cambridge
Companion to Literature in the Digital Age*, edited by the inimitable<sup>1</sup> Adam Hammond.

Given the topic, I worry about writing a theoretical piece that strays too far from actual
material realities. Too often, a discussion on materialism in literary studies is inverted to
to privilege the "representation of," and therefore, ultimately, ideology over things, economic
inequities, or labor conditions. In the following several posts I would like to draft a cogent
alternative.

## Introduction

The interpretation of texts is complicated by the fact that ideas take shape in matter. My
words thus reach you within a specific medium---paper, audio file, or an electronic
text---which serves as a conduit for the transmission of information. Aristotle, in his
*Poetics*, similarly differentiated between the objects or content of art, its medium, and the
mode of mimesis. Prose describing the way a bird sings, for example, finds its object of
imitation in actual bird songs, further expressed in the medium of written language.  Charlie
Parker's style of playing imitated birds musically, through his saxophone, where the American
ornithologist John James Audubon painted his birds in watercolor. Yet even this distinction
between media fails to capture the difference in the modality of perception (and comprehension
also). Of the mode Aristotle mentions only the contrast between an author "speaking in one's
own person" and speaking with "other people engaged" in mimesis.  Consider, for example, a film
actor turning to the camera to address their audience, thus shifting the interpretive
perspective from an intra-diegetic vantage to an extra-diegetic one. Sit still, our actor says.
The directive plays with the convention of theater-going.  Contemplated in somber silence of an
art house theater it almost gains a philosophical significance, though I would prefer to watch
it amongst the clamor of a local pub movie night.

Some of you might similarly prefer to read a novel in the comfort of your own home, while
others enjoy the sense of a community and deep discussion that happens in book clubs, on online
forums, or in class. However we read, texts in their abstract sense must pass into print to
become reified objects---book things. They will take shape on paper or screen, and once again
rarefy into thought by diffusion into their physiological and social contexts. At first, we
simply wanted to read a book, but in practice, we now must discuss where and when it is to be
understood. Where and when matter in a way that prevents us from talking about meaning without
context.

The material conditions of a thought can often be disregarded in favor of its ideational
content. When we refer to Zora Neale Hurston's collection of African-American folklore
published under the title *Mules and Men* in 1935, we denote equally the numerous editions of
the work, published since 1935. This allocation usually implies neither her notes nor her
manuscripts, available in parts at the American Folklife Center in the Library of Congress; at
the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University; and in the P.K. Yonge Library
of Florida History at the University of Florida.  Once these documents come into view, they
assert an inexorable pull on the content of the published work. Our awareness of the
auto-ethnographic method at work in Hurston's prose irrevocably changes our perception of the
novel. Rather than seeing it as one thing, we can now perceive a number of related
publications, notes, drafts, and manuscripts, which in their overlapping totality comprise the
general field of the work. Matter asserts itself through the idea. We are reminded at once of
its palpable effects on abstraction and of its shape-giving influence on the foundations of any
thought.

As a matter of method, to become a materialist, and especially one of a historical ilk, one
must insist on the often inconvenient intrusion of the physical world into the realm of the
ideal. I would prefer to sit back in my armchair and just read Hurston, heeding neither
Gainesville nor New Haven. I would rather forego the messiness of competing manuscripts,
editorial interventions, international editions of the work which slightly alter Hurston's
lexicon, the Harlem Renaissance, her problematic stance toward it, her time at Columbia
University spent with Franz Boas and Margaret Mead, her wealth and her literary patronage, her
sometime poverty, the socio-economic realities of black publishing, or, in her own words, "what
white publishers won't print" (the title of an essay she published in the *Negro Digest* in
1950). These things interfere with my physical complacency. They force me to stand and to
travel. They fracture the unity of meaning. Where I presumed to interpret and to explain,
instead I find a multiplicity of competing possibilities, errors, and emendations along with my
own various limits and conditions, incommensurate to the lived experience of another. The
materialist method entails hermeneutics embedded and embodied. To think in one's head is
insufficient for understanding: we must also walk, touch, make, and be discomforted.

<sup>1. See for example his “[Distinguishing Voices in The Waste Land Using Computational
Stylistics](http://www.adamhammond.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/55-158-1-pb-3.pdf).” in
*Linguistic Issues in Language Technology* 12.2 (October 2015): 1-43, co-authored with
Julian Brooke and Graeme Hirst.</sup>
